Welcome back.
Now why you'll learn in the next few videos is quite advanced.
It does take some time to really grasp the concepts and understand them.
And the best way to do that is to do these yourselves.
So use these videos as a reference to come back to when you have questions.
I'm going to cover the main topics that you'll see out in the wild.
You can come back and reference these videos whenever you have questions and in this video we're going
to tackle advanced functions.
Now I have a sample function for you here.
But knowing what we learned about the new javascript syntax we're going to convert this first to how
we should write JavaScript in 2018.
Function word is gone now.
We can just say cost first equals
hero function and this error function has a greet which can be a constant and a function which again
can be cost.
Second
and finally this can be a cost as well.
We also learned about scope an important property of function is that the variables create in the inside
of them including their parameters are local to the function.
So that means that every time we run the first function this block of code gets executed and they greet
variable gets created every time.
Now this is actually good for us because we make sure that if our program every time we run first remembered
degreed well they'll have conflicts because it's a constant and we constantly reassign the same thing
to a variable that already exists.
So this way within a function we make sure that every time we run it it's a clean slate.
You can name the variables however you like because there's nothing else that will collide with it.
Like I said this behavior helps prevent accidental interferences between functions and as developers
we want to minimize the number of bugs or errors in our code.
If all variables were shared by the whole program it take a lot of effort to make sure no name is ever
used for two different purposes.
Imagine if Grete was in another function and we had no idea and we can't use it.
Well luckily by having our own separate scope we're able to make sure that we can use greed without
having to check the entire code base now by treating function local variables as existing only within
the function.
The language makes it possible to read and understand functions as small universes where whatever happens
in that universe only matters to itself but I also wanted to demonstrate an interesting concept with
JavaScript and that is closures you can think of it as this a function runs the function executed.
Now it's never going to execute again kind of like the first function we just executed it here and the
result we put into new function it's going to remember that there are references to those variables
alive in a memory first.
However we see a problem here.
You see that when we load up this program on our Web site the JavaScript engine will see this and I'll
say OK we have a variable first that's a function great.
And then in the next line we see what we want to assign a variable new function and we want to get the
result of first.
So the program runs first sees that we want to create a constant greet high and then we also see that
we have another function called second and we're returning that function.
But there is a problem here right.
Second needs to remember what greed is although first runs and return second so we can think of this
as once we do this we will only have the second function
now and I know this is this looks confusing but just look at the highlighted here.
That's what calling first means but you see over here that the Greek variable second doesn't.
Well it's not within the scope of second rate what closures does and this is a rule in Javascript is
that the child scope always has access to the parent scope so it's almost as if it remembers they always
remember that there's a reference to those variables alive.
So inside the web browser the web browser says oh this second function needs greed.
So I'm going to remember it.
Let me demonstrate that for you.
So if I do first here and I'm going to copy this into the console and now we have new function.
If I run new function I get high.
Even though first is never going to be run again the only thing that we have left is the second function
the web browser remembers Grete again this is a confusing concept.
When you hear for the first time but like I said Just remember closures is just saying a function ran
the function executed
it's never going to execute again
but it's going to remember that there are references to those variables.
So that child's scope always has access to the parents.
Now you may be wondering if I did hear const name equals Bobby will the first function have access to
Bobby.
No it wouldn't.
So think of it this way.
Children always have access to their parents scope by parents scope.
They don't have access to their children.
All right let's get into a few more things.
Next we're going to talk about currying and curbing is the process of converting a function that takes
multiple arguments into a function that takes them one at a time.
Let's see what I mean.
We have a function here we'll call it multiply and multiply accepts two parameters and again we're using
our new function syntax will say a multiplies B
now currying means we're changing this function to only accept one parameter at a time.
So that means we do curried multiply equals a B
A times B Whoa whoa what do we just do and again this looks very confusing.
But think of these arrows as functions.
So right now if I do curried multiply and I'll just say three well let's see this in action what happens
I get a function that sets B multiply B so by running this is saying that a is three
and now we'll know that when we multiply a street.
But because this has a function and another function so a function inside of a function this just returns
this part so returns a function as you can see here.
So now in order to make this work.
Let me put this back in order to make it work.
We have to say curried multiply we'll say three.
And then another bracket for and I get 12 if we look at this function compared to here we see exactly
what we did we created a variable curried multiplier that accepts a parameter so it's a function that
accepts a.
In this case it's three and once you call that function once you've run it ever returns a another function
that accepts B.
And that function multiplies A and B.
So what I'm doing here is saying create a multiplier a is three B is four.
And now multiply a times b and as you can see as I said about currying it's the process of converting
a function that takes multiple arguments like I said into a function that takes them one at a time.
Now why do we even need to do this.
Because now it's more extensible I can do something like const multiply by five equals and now I have
this.
So any time I want to multiply by five I could just say let me copy this.
Now anytime I want to multiply a number by five five
10 and now I have this function that was created that always multiply things by 5 which is very cool.
All right we're going to get into one more thing and then I promise I'll make your head stop hurting.
It's called compose and compose is the act of putting two functions together to form a third function
where the output of one function is the input of the other even me saying that I'm like What did I just
say.
So let's write this down a compose looks like this let's say F and G parameters f and g return a function
that takes parameter a that returns a function that has this holy moly.
And if you look at this and you have no idea what's going on there's something that takes years for
some to get it is really really advanced stuff.
But if you're able to understand the inner workings of this you can pretty much do anything.
Let's let's give it a go.
What is happening here.
Well it looks like looking at f and g.
It looks like F is a function because while we have the brackets it even highlighted in blue for you
and G is also a function if I had a some function that that lets say takes a number
and just adds one what we can do with compose is I can say compose again.
We have the function here some sum so both f and g are some and now because it takes a another bracket
I can say
all right.
So let's run this and then we can go step by step to show you what it does I get seven so why is that.
Well let's take it one by one if both f and g are some and a is five we look at what the function returns
and because again we have two brackets we're executing the first part of the function which returns
us another function which is this and within it we give the a five.
So when this function runs it says a is five.
OK.
And then let's run the inner function G.
In this case it's sum.
So if you remember some is just saying give me five and then five plus one.
So now this changes to six and then finally the F function runs which is again some and this says some
is giving me six so six plus one is seven and this whole thing returns seven.
All right.
That was a whole ton of stuff but I want you to remember these three key words because when you get
to advanced JavaScript functions are really really important.
You'll hear words like closures and currying and compose a lot and you'll find tools and libraries that
use these heavily.
Now you don't need to know the definition of them.
You just need to be able to read a piece of code and understand what's going on.
And this is why I like showing you this although it's really advanced and very hard to to grasp by understanding
the step by step process of how a function works.
This is really useful because now when you encounter this in the wild you'll understand how everything
works now to finish off this function section.
I want to tell you the most important thing that you can do as a web developer when creating code and
that is the idea of avoiding side effects and functional purity.
What does that mean.
Well let's go back to my diagram here.
You might remember this from the first part where we said a input is what we give a function input of
some sort.
It could be an empty input or it could have parameters like five or 10.
A function does something that we define.
It has its own scope.
Remember it's its own universe.
It could have console log it could do a bunch of stuff and then it asks Am I returning anything you
can do.
This should be undefined so you can return a value or if it doesn't return anything.
It just does on define now the two words that I just said sides effects and functional purity will side
effects are any of these things any of actions that happen.
Inside of the function that we don't really know anything about if it interacts or reads or writes to
an external variable for example or console logs.
Well that's a side effect.
If we change here a variable one A equals one
and then I have a function
that changes a.
Well that's a side effect.
That's something that the function's doing to effect the outside world.
Remember we want to think of functions as its own universe and if it starts affecting the outside world.
I mean it's not the end of the world we've done console log before we've done we've done this before
but it is good practice to avoid these side effects.
And by avoiding these side effects we have something called functional purity and functional purity
is a concept where we say in order for us to write really really good programs we want to avoid side
effects and we always wonder return so that this and this are gone and we always return something and
what's the power in this by avoiding side effects.
And always returning we create something that we call deterministic and deterministic is a word that
you may have heard.
It means that no matter what if my inputs let's say 5 and 10 go through this function this little universe
the return value will be always the same.
Let me say that again the input whatever we put in the parameters whether it's empty or it has certain
parameters it always returns if we run this a thousand times it always returns the same value that's
determinism.
It's a very important concept and that's a key principle in avoiding bugs.
Because if this function always does the same thing well then you know exactly what it does and you
won't have random errors popping up here and there.
That's what I want to leave you with although this is not the law and you'll find code bases that we'll
have a lot of side effects.
There's gonna be a lot of things happening inside functions that maybe even affect variables that live
outside of a function.
It is really really good practice to be a top performing developer to have this in mind of creating
functions that minimize side effects and have functional purity what we call determinism where anything
you put into the function it always returns the same thing.
All right that's it for now.
Go try out some exercises.
I'll see you in the next one.
Bye bye.